Trade estimates
===============

International trade plays an important role in some of the most
prominent studies aimed at estimating the scale of illicit financial
flows. A case in point is one of the first estimates of illicit
financial flows in the book by Raymond Baker (2005), who in 2006 founded
Global Financial Integrity (GFI), an NGO which is well-known for its own
estimates. Mainly on the basis of around 550 interviews with corporate
employees, Baker (2005) estimated that more than USD 539 billion flows
out of developing and transitional economies each year due to a
combination of commercial tax evasion, fraud in international trade,
drug trafficking, and corruption; and that international trade abuses
account for the largest part. These abuses are due both to criminal
(illegal arms trade, smuggling) and illicit (mispricing between
unrelated and abusive transfer pricing between related companies, and
‘fake transactions’) activities. On the basis of Baker (2005), Christian
Aid (2008) estimates the amount of tax revenue lost to developing
countries annually through these two techniques, transfer mispricing and
false invoicing, at 157 billion USD.

In contrast with the pioneering estimates by Baker (2005) based partly
on interviews (direct, if anecdotal, evidence), most of the more recent
approaches to estimation recognise that it is not possible to observe
illicit financial flows directly and estimate them indirectly. These
approaches are based on the little available economic data that is
available about activities potentially related to illicit financial
flows. Specifically, the methodologies often focus on exploiting
anomalies in the data that may arise from the process of hiding the
flows (but can also arise for other reasons – a critical point to which
we return when we critically evaluate the estimation methodologies).

The most prominent approaches focus on anomalies in the current account
(via misreported or mispriced trade, discussed in this chapter) and in
the capital account (through partially unrecorded capital movements,
discussed in the next chapter). Some of the authors combine the two
approaches, including GFI reports covering most developing countries,
and Ndikumana and Boyce who focus on African countries (in these cases
we discuss their trade and capital components in the respective
chapters). Both of these group of approaches are reviewed in the few
existing reviews of illicit financial flows such as, for example, the
edited volume of Reuter (2012) and Johannesen & Pirttilä (2016), who
mostly use the term capital flight (a related but distinct concept,
which has earlier generated quite a lot of research interest, e.g.
Cuddington, 1987, Dooley, 1988, Collier, Hoeffler, & Pattillo, 2001,
Beja, 2005). In these reviews and elsewhere, both of these approaches
have been subjected to critical evaluations and we discuss them
alongside the relevant literature.

Within the trade estimates we distinguish three broadly defined groups
of approaches, roughly according to the data used, and we discuss them
one by one. (This classification is not perfect with some studies
fitting in more, or none, of these groups, but we believe that it does
help us to enhance the discussion.) The first subchapter examines
estimates based mostly on country-level data (i.e. for each country or
country pair we have only one piece of information available), although
some of the reviewed studies use more detailed data. The second
subchapter discusses studies based on commodity-level trade data. Each
of these first two subchapters deals with a specific methodological
approach as well. The first subchapter focuses on so called trade mirror
statistics, while the second subchapter investigates studies looking at
abnormal prices. The studies discussed in these two subchapters, and in
the first one in particular, have been subject to evaluation by other
researchers, such as Hong & Pak (2016) or Nitsch (2017), that have
pointed out the methodological weaknesses such as unrealistic
assumptions in these studies (and we discuss critical observations from
these evaluations below). Emerging partly as a response to these
criticisms, the final subchapter discusses the most recent and, from the
point of view of rigour, most promising studies. These studies rely on
only recently available detailed transaction-level data. This kind of
detailed data is so far available only for a limited number of
countries, although their number is increasing.

We thus provide a broad classification of the existing trade data-based
estimates of illicit financial flows, of which we provide an overview in
Table \*. In addition to prevailing method and level and sources of
data, Table \* includes examples of recent studies as well as our brief
evaluation of the reliability of methodology and availability of
estimates in terms of country coverage. This is of course only a quick
bird’s eye view – the individual studies covered differ from each other
within the subchapters and the each study has its own pros and cons,
including its suitability for estimation of scale of illicit financial
flows or for audit purposes.

**Table \*. Broad classification of trade data-based estimates of
illicit financial flows**

  Sub-chapter   Prevailing level of data      Prevailing sources of data           Prevailing method                                                   Recent examples                                Reliability of the methodology                                                                              Availability and country coverage
  ------------- ----------------------------- ------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  2.1           Country (and commodity)       IMF (and UN Comtrade)                Mirror trade statistics                                             GFI’s Spanjers & Salomon (2017)                Not recommended as estimates of scale, perhaps suitable for preliminary identification for audit purposes   Excellent and most of the world
  2.2           Commodity (and transaction)   Country-specific (and UN Comtrade)   Abnormal prices                                                     Chalendard, Raballand, & Rakotoarisoa (2017)   Not recommended as estimates of scale, perhaps suitable for preliminary identification for audit purposes   Excellent and most of the world
  2.3           Transaction                   Country-specific                     Systematic differences between intra-firm and arm’s length prices   Davies, Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017)       Good (estimates of scale and for audit purposes)                                                            Limited and only a few countries

*Source: Authors*

1.  Country-level trade estimates: mirror trade statistics
    ------------------------------------------------------

    1.  ### Overview

The early estimates of illicit financial flows on the basis of trade
data (which happen to be also some of the first estimates of illicit
financial flows more generally) are based on aggregate country-level
international trade data. Most of these studies capture the quantity of
illicit flows by contrasting what a country claims it imported from (or
exported to) the rest of the world with what the rest of the world
states it exported to (or imported from) that given country. The
development of this method of – what others call and we are going to
call - mirror trade statistics, which compares import and export data
for the same trade flow, goes back to Morgenstern (1950, 1974) and
Bhagwati (1964, 1974) and was applied, for example, by Beja (2008) for
China and by Berger & Nitsch (2012) for five largest importers. On the
one hand, we include all of approaches using the logic of the mirror
trade statistics method in this subchapter, although some of them, such
as Berger & Nitsch (2012) or Ndikumana (2016), have been applied at the
commodity level (and not at the country level as the name of the
subchapter suggests). One the other hand, we do not discuss in detail
literature related to specifically tariff evasion as pioneered by
Bhagwati (1964) and later developed, for example, by Javorcik & Narciso
(2008).

We focus in our description on perhaps the two most prominent mirror
trade statistics approache. These are those by the organisation GFI, and
by the duo of authors Ndikumana and Boyce. Both combine a trade-related
IFF component with estimates based on capital-account data that we
discuss in the next chapter. They both assume that traders deliberately
misreport trade through faking invoices or other forms of misinvoicing
and we discuss these two in detail below. Before that we briefly explore
various motivations why trading partners might misinvoice the trade
volumes or prices. A recent overview of these various motives is
provided, for example, by Kellenberg & Levinson (2016) and Nitsch (2017)
and they range from tariff evasion to tax evasion. In Table 3, together
with Nitsch (2017), we distinguish four types of trade misinvoicing
measured along two dimensions – first whether the trade flows are
exports or imports and, second, whether these flows are overinvoiced or
underinvoiced. We agree with Nitsch's (2017) argument that the broad
range of incentives to misreport trade provides a challenge for the
empirical assessment of its scale and in the this and the following two
subchapters we review how various researchers and methods have dealt
with this challenge so far.

<span id="_Toc497508636" class="anchor"></span>**Table 3. Types of trade
misinvoicing**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Overinvoicing                                                                                                                              Underinvoicing
  -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Export   Export overinvoicing                                                                                                                       Export underinvoicing
                                                                                                                                                      
           To take advantage of export subsidies - Celasun & Rodrik (1989a), Celasun & Rodrik (1989b)                                                 To evade export restrictions, to circumvent trade restrictions (a misclassification of products or a misdeclaration of the final destination of a shipment) or to avoid product taxes - Fisman & Wei (2009), Kellenberg & Levinson (2016)

  Import   Import overinvoicing                                                                                                                       Import underinvoicing
                                                                                                                                                      
           To misclassify other imports (underreport some imports and thus overreport other imports) - Chalendard, Raballand, & Rakotoarisoa (2016)   To reduce the payment of customs duties or to avoid product taxes - Yang (2008), Kellenberg & Levinson (2016)
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Source: Authors on the basis of Nitsch (2017) and other literature*

### Data

Both GFI’s Spanjers & Salomon (2017) and Ndikumana & Boyce (2010) use
IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS). DOTS covers many countries
and has been the preferred source of international trade data because of
its superior coverage of countries. DOTS include imports and exports of
merchandise goods only (i.e. not services) and this limitation holds
also for the other often used data source, UN Comtrade. Also, in both
databases imports are usually reported on a cost, insurance and freight
(CIF) basis and exports are reported on a free on board (f.o.b.) basis.
C.i.f. values include the transaction value of the goods, the value of
services performed to deliver goods to the border of the exporting
country and the value of the services performed to deliver the goods
from the border of the exporting country to the border of the importing
country. F.o.b. values include the transaction value of the goods and
the value of services performed to deliver goods to the border of the
exporting country.

DOTS includes information at country level with trade flows between
country pairs available for a subgroup of countries. When available,
GFI’s Spanjers & Salomon (2017) use DOTS data preferably at bilateral
level (around half countries in Europe and Western Hemisphere) and
otherwise at aggregate level (two thirds of all countries including a
vast majority of countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and most countries in
Asia and other regions). They do further adjustments to their trade
misinvoicing estimates (not discussed in detail below) using data from
Hong Kong, Switzerland, South Africa and Zambia with additional data for
these countries. Similarly, Ndikumana & Boyce (2010) rely on the IMF’s
DOTS (using bilateral data for a group of industrialised countries) in
trade adjustments of their estimates for trade invoicing.

Some recent research, such as Berger & Nitsch (2012), Kellenberg &
Levinson (2016) and Ndikumana (2016), uses UN Comtrade. UN Comtrade data
(discussed in some detail below) seem to be in some respects equivalent
to IMF’s DOTS data (but, importantly, the coverage of countries has been
lower in UN Comtrade) and in respect of disaggregation, UN Comtrade
seems to be the preferable source: data are available at a product level
and for recent years, on a monthly basis. The mirror statistics approach
could be applied to (rarely available) transaction-level data as well,
but it is only possible if this data is available from two reporting
countries so that their bilateral trade could be analysed (since in
practice most of the transaction-level data that is currently available
is limited to one country only, as we discuss in the final subchapter).
This is in contrast with the abnormal prices methodologies discussed in
the following subchapter, for which one country data source is
sufficient and that might partly explain why most of the research at the
frontier on the basis of the transaction-level data discussed in the
third subchapter builds on ideas similar to those in the abnormal prices
research (rather than mirror trade statistics).

Both IMF’s DOTS and UN Comtrade, if used at country-level in particular,
provide a very good international coverage in terms of a number of
countries for which there is information available. However, the
information is highly aggregated, giving the values of imports and
exports with disaggregation by trading partner only, and any analysis on
the basis of this data is naturally constrained by this aggregate data’s
limitations. We evaluate the methodologies critically below and it is
clear that many of the limitations stem from, or are interlinked with,
the nature of the data, its aggregate level in particular. Also, the IMF
has expressed concerns about the use of the discrepancies in these
international trade datasets. In a consultation for the SDG indicator
(Inter-agency Expert Group on SDG Indicators, 2015, p. 280), the IMF
argued that official estimates of trade misinvoicing cannot be derived
by transforming trade data from the IMF’s DOTS or UN Comtrade either by
individual data or in aggregate. Instead, the IMF representative Carol
Baker argued that estimates of illicit financial flows should be based
on an understanding of specific country's circumstances and on
administrative data such as customs reports and we review the leading
available estimate based on this type of data in the final sub-chapter.

UN Comtrade database contains the most detailed data available for
global analysis of international trade. The most detailed classification
of commodities (goods or products) follows the Harmonized System
categorisation at the six-digit level. The UN Comtrade database
collates, standardises and makes available data from national
authorities (typically customs authorities) on the annual quantity,
value and trade partner country of commodity trade. Complications in the
data collation process mean that there are some limitations to what can
be expected of the dataset. UN Comtrade (2018) itself lists on its
website six limitations in particular, which we summarise as follows.
First, confidentiality results in some data on detailed commodity
categories not being available, although this is still captured in data
on higher-level aggregates. Second, coverage is not complete; that is,
while the database runs from 1961 to the present, not all countries
report all of their trade for every year. Third, classifications vary –
that is, different commodity classifications are used by different
countries in different periods, so comparisons cannot always be exact.
Fourth, conversion cannot always be precise; that is, where the database
includes data that has been converted from one classification to
another, these will not always map precisely one on to the other and
hence imprecision may result. Fifth, consistency between reporters of
the same trade is not guaranteed: that is, exporter and importer country
might record the same trade differently due to various factors including
valuation (e.g. imports c.i.f. versus export f.o.b.), differences in
inclusions of particular commodities or timing. Sixth, country of origin
rules mean that the ‘partner country’ recorded for imports will
generally be the country of origin and need not imply a direct trading
relationship. These limitations are relevant for analysis of prices as
well as for mirror trade statistics. We believe that that caution is
required, but do not prevent reasonable use of the data.

### Methodology

The trade misinvoicing estimates by the GFI, most recently reported by
Spanjers & Salomon (2017) are based on the assumption that whatever
exports or imports are reported by advanced economies, but not equally
reported by developing countries, are illicit financial flows (either
under-invoicing or over-invoicing). In addition to what they call lower
bound estimate using only developing country-advanced economies
relationships, their upper bound estimates are scaled up on the basis of
assuming that traders misinvoice with other developing countries at the
same rate they misinvoice with advanced economies. An earlier similar
approach applied by the GFI is named the trade mispricing model, e.g.
Kar & Cartwright-Smith (2009), but here we focus on the most recently
published version.

GFI’s Spanjers & Salomon (2017) use the following series of equations to
explain their ‘bilateral advanced economies calculation.’

$$\text{ID}_{jp,t} = \frac{I_{j,t}}{r} - X_{p,t}$$

$$\text{ED}_{jp,t} = \frac{I_{p,t}}{r} - X_{j,t}$$

where $I_{j,t}$ are imports by the developing country *j* from the
partner country *p* at time *t*, $I_{p,t}$ are partner country *p*’s
imports from the developing country *j* at time *t*, $X_{j,t}$ are
developing country *j*’s exports to partner country *p* at time *t*, and
$X_{p,t}$ are partner country *p*’s exports to the developing country
*j* at time *t*. Through the use of *r* (assumed to be 1.1) they aim to
make the import and export data comparable by converting import data
reported as c.i.f. to an f.o.b. basis, in which export data are reported
in IMF’s DOTS.

GFI’s Spanjers & Salomon (2017) interpret negative values of ID as
import under-invoicing and illicit inflows and positive values as
over-invoicing and illicit outflows. In parallel, they interpret
negative values of ED as export over-invoicing and illicit inflows and
positive values of ED as export under-invoicing and illicit outflows. In
their interpretation, they make a number of assumptions that we discuss
and, with the help of existing literature, critically evaluate below.

Furthermore, for developing countries for which the bilateral data used
in the equations above are not available (almost two thirds of
developing countries), Spanjers & Salomon (2017) apply what they call
world aggregate calculation – substituting the individual partner
countries *p* above with one partner, the whole world, *w*. Spanjers &
Salomon (2017) themselves recognise a number of challenges related to
this step. First, it implicitly treats developing country partner trade
data as being as accurate as those of advanced economies. Second, it
leads to what they call erratic swings in magnitude.

Spanjers & Salomon (2017) apply this approach to developing countries
and their partner advanced economies to arrive at what they label low
estimates (they scale down the world aggregate calculation to include
only the share of trade with advanced economies using the partner data).
For their high estimates, they extrapolate this to the world total,
assuming that trade misinvoicing is as prevalent with other developing
countries as it is with advanced economies. When the scale of trade
misinvoicing is summed up across all developing countries, the high
estimates are bound to double count flows between developing countries,
an issue that the low estimates avoid.

In a separate, but similar stream of studies, Ndikumana & Boyce (e.g.
2010) also estimate trade misinvoicing. Ndikumana & Boyce (2010) make
the trade invoicing adjustment by comparing countries’ export and import
data to those of trading partners, assuming the industrialised countries
data to be relatively accurate and interpreting the difference as
evidence of misinvoicing. They use equations equivalent to those of
Spanjers & Salomon (2017) to arrive at values of $\text{ID}_{jp,t}$ and
$\text{ED}_{jp,t}$. They then, in line with GFI’s high estimates,
extrapolate these estimates for industrialised countries to global
totals by dividing each of $\text{ID}_{jp,t}$ and $\text{ED}_{jp,t}$
with the average shares of industrialised countries in the African
country’s exports and imports, respectively.

An important distinguishing feature of the Ndikumana & Boyce methodology
in contrast with of GFI’s Spanjers & Salomon (2017), is that for each
year and each African country, the values of estimates of export
discrepancies and import discrepancies are summed up to a total trade
misinvoicing (which is then added to their total estimate of capital
flight). In GFI’s labelling we can write the equation of Ndikumana &
Boyce as

$$\text{Trade\ misinvoicing}_{\text{it}} = \text{ID}_{jp,t} + \text{ED}_{jp,t} = \frac{\frac{I_{p,t}}{r} - X_{j,t}}{\text{ICXS}_{i}} + \frac{\frac{I_{j,t}}{r} - X_{p,t}}{\text{ICMS}_{i}}$$

where $\text{ICXS}_{i}$ and $\text{ICMS}_{i}$ are the average shares of
industrialised countries in the African country’s exports and imports,
respectively. It implies that outflows and inflows can net out at this
stage. This would lead to similar estimates to the GFI method when both
export and import misinvoicing estimates have the same sign, but to very
different magnitudes where one indicates outflows and the other,
inflows. Overall, Ndikumana & Boyce net off their estimates of illicit
inflows to obtain a more conservative (and also more volatile) series,
while the GFI argues that because ‘there is no such thing as net crime’,
it makes sense to consider gross outflows (summing absolute values to
arrive at a sum of illicit financial flows).

In practice a similar methodological approach can be applied not only at
the country level, but also at the commodity level. For example, there
are two pieces of research carried out in the late 2000s that consider
the mirror trade statistics and aim to explain the observed gap. Fisman
& Wei (2009) focus on the trade in arts and find evidence consistent
with smuggling patterns. Berger & Nitsch (2012) use a similar approach
for more products and argue that the reporting gaps partly represent
smuggling activities.

More recently, and more explicitly focused on illicit financial flows,
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) & African Union
(2015), in the report of the High Level Panel on Illicit Flows out of
Africa (the ‘Mbeki report’), aim to assess illicit financial flows at
the country and sector levels through trade mispricing using
misinvoicing. They consider their methodology similar to the trade
mispricing model used earlier by GFI, e.g. Kar & Cartwright-Smith
(2009), and thus similar to the most recent trade misinvoicing estimates
of Spanjers & Salomon (2017). Although the logic remains the same, they
improve the methodology in a number of areas. In contrast with the GFI
approach, the Mbeki report by ECA (2015) uses data from UN Comtrade,
which provides bilateral trade data at the product-level for more than
5000 products (GFI’s preferred IMF data do not contain this detail). ECA
(2015) recognises that discrepancies can occur for a number of reasons,
including but not limited to illicit financial flows. In line with
Ndikumana & Boyce, but in contrast with GFI, ECA (2015) net off the
estimates for a given pair of countries for a given product, which helps
them avoid the issue of negative illicit financial flows. Rather than
assume that c.i.f. values are 10% higher than f.o.b. values, as both
Ndikumana & Boyce and the GFI do, ECA (2015) estimate it using the
CEPII’s BACI database built upon UN Comtrade. Overall, with the
application of these improvements ECA (2015) likely achieves more
reliable estimates of trade mispricing than the other approaches; but
some other important drawbacks of this adaptation of trade mirror
statistics method remain. A similar approach has been applied by
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (2016, p. 124).

Even more recent is the research of Ndikumana (2016), similar to
Ndikumana & Boyce, but using a different level and source of data.
(Despite these differences, and Ndikumana (2016) using commodity- rather
than country-level trade data, we include it here - as with the Mbeki
report above - because of its similarities to Ndikumana & Boyce).
Ndikumana (2016), in a report prepared, and later partially updated
following a critical feedback, for UNCTAD, follows a similar
methodological approach as in the research by Ndikumana and Boyce
discussed above, but at a more detailed, commodity level. Ndikumana
(2016) estimates export misinvoicing (*DX*), and import misinvoicing
(*DM*), for country *i*, product (or commodity) *k*, and partner *j* at
time *t*:

$$\text{DX}_{i,j,t}^{k} = M_{j,i,t}^{k} - \beta \times X_{i,j,t}^{k}$$

$$\text{DM}_{i,j,t}^{k} = M_{i,j,t}^{k} - \beta \times X_{j,i,t}^{k}$$

where $M_{j,i,t}^{k}$ stands for imports by country *j* from country *i*
in time *t* of commodity *k*, and, similarly, $X_{i,j,t}^{k}$ for
exports by country *i* to country *j* as reported by country *i*, and
$\beta$ is the freight and insurance factor (similarly to *r* in the
previous subchapter).

As in the research by Ndikumana and Boyce, Ndikumana (2016) argues that
positive values of *DX* and negative value of *DM* provide indications
of export and import underinvoicing, respectively, and negative values
of *DX* and positive values of *DM* indicate export and import
overinvoicing, respectively. Ndikumana (2016) applies the methodology to
selected countries and commodities. The methodology is also dependent on
assumptions similar to Ndikumana and Boyce and most of the criticism
discussed below – in some cases likely to a somewhat lower extent
because of the more detailed data used - relates to Ndikumana (2016) as
well. In addition, the critical discussion specific to Ndikumana (2016)
has been documented by Forstater (2016a) and Forstater (2016b) (for
example, Brülhart, Kukenova, & Dihel (2015) explain the trade gap in
Zambia’s copper exports by the copper being traded by companies
headquartered in Switzerland, but exported to other countries than
Switzerland).

While these trade-based estimates of illicit financial flows may include
some trade mispricing by multinational enterprises for the purpose of
shifting profits to countries with lower taxation (so called transfer
mispricing), trade misinvoicing is a more crude approach to tax
reduction than most of those challenged in the OECD Base Erosion and
Profit Shifting action plan, the major international attempt to curtail
the problem. The survey conducted by Baker (2005), which found
widespread commercial tax *evasion* through trade, relates to an earlier
period; and it may be thought likely that the documented explosion in
sophistication of multinational tax minimisation practices has seen
non-trade-based forms of avoidance become dominant.

Instead, the anomalies now estimated through mirror trade statistics are
more likely to reveal unrelated party transactions that aim to shift
part of one party’s income into a different country (so called trade
mispricing). As GFI, for example, now state on their website – in
contrast to Baker (2005):[^1]

> *Because they often both involve mispricing, many aggressive tax
> avoidance schemes by multinational corporations can easily be confused
> with trade misinvoicing. However, they should be regarded as separate
> policy problems with separate solutions. That said, multinational
> corporations can and do engage in trade misinvoicing. This activity,
> however, involves the deliberate misreporting of the value of a
> customs transactions, and is thus illegal tax evasion, not legal tax
> avoidance. *

In mirror trade statistics approach, researchers use mostly
country-level trade data to establish anomalies in the declared values
of total exports and imports, on the basis that these reveal illicit
shifts of value. On one view, these estimates are rather conservative.
They are able to pick up only a share of all of trade mispricing or
trade misinvoicing. The data does not pick up, for example, trade
transactions where the misinvoicing is incorporated in the same invoice
exchanged between exporter and importer. In addition their data includes
only goods and their results thus exclude any scale of misinvoicing of
services and intangibles. On the other hand, the estimates are based on
a number of important assumptions and are bound to include much more
than trade misinvoicing and this has been rightly criticised and we
highlight the most important critical points below.

Overall, the earlier studies succeeded in highlighting the importance of
tax havens and illicit financial flows and bringing these issues to
wider attention, but there are difficulties with these estimates and
some of the individual methods were earlier criticised by, for example,
Hines (2010) or Fuest & Riedel (2012) and a number of other chapters in
the book edited by Reuter (2012), while both Forstater (2015) and Reuter
(2017) consider the estimates of illicit financial flows as
overestimates and as playing a misleading role in the public debate.

Some problems are common to most of the pioneering research in this area
(including these trade estimates as well as the capital account
estimates in the following chapter). To be able to derive any estimates,
most of the methods necessarily rely on strong assumptions, for example,
about what the data on trade reflects. Similarly, most of the estimates
do not shed more light on specific policy measures - the results may not
provide more guidance for policy other than a general recommendation to
reduce illicit financial flows; or, in the worst possible case, they
could suggest erroneous areas for policy priority. We discuss some of
these critiques in detail below.

Because the studies which are critical of the methodologies, are often
important contributions in themselves we briefly review their critical
points one study at a time below. For each of the selected recent
studies, we briefly sum up and evaluate their main points, including
their views, if any, on how to improve estimates in the future. None of
the reviewed critical studies dispute the existence of trade-based
illicit financial flows, but they do raise important reservations about
their estimated scale and the methodologies, notably their assumptions.
This is underlined by Reuter (2017) in a recent study for the World
Bank, who summarises some of the criticisms of, above all, the GFI
approach in particular – but importantly also draws two other
conclusions. First, he acknowledges that GFI is the only organisation
that has consistently studied the phenomenon. Second, he argues that
whatever the criticisms of the existing estimates, there is no doubt
that illicit financial flows are substantial enough to merit close
attention.

One of the few recent papers explicitly aimed at reviewing the methods,
Johannesen & Pirttilä (2016) highlight three important conceptual issues
(again of some relevance also to estimates based on capital account
data). First, these estimates are likely to capture illegitimate as well
as completely legitimate flows, which are not likely to be covered by
most people’s preferred definition of illicit financial flows, and the
applied methodologies are not able to distinguish between these. Second,
the approaches by GFI as well as by Ndikumana & Boyce estimate net
illicit financial flows and provide some scope for outflows and inflows
to neutralize each other (at transaction, commodity, or country level)
and result in zero or negative total illicit financial flows, which
complicates interpretation of the estimates. Third, since the illicit
financial flows are often estimated as residuals or discrepancies, the
resulting estimates will tend to be compounded by measurement errors
associated with the trade flows. In line with Johannesen & Pirttilä
(2016), we also find the research by Zucman (2013) persuasive and an
inspiration for future research, as recently exemplified by
Alstadsaeter, Johannesen, & Zucman (2018). In addition, Johannesen &
Pirttilä (2016) see a potential in data sources such as leaks from
offshore banks that have been unused in this research area until
recently (e.g. Alstadsaeter, Johannesen, & Zucman, 2017).

The trade mirror statistics method, as applied by GFI in particular, has
been subjected to critique by Hong & Pak (2016), who are worried that
the GFI estimates overestimate how much developing countries lose due to
illicit financial flows. Hong & Pak (2016) focus on a specific
assumption of what they call the partner-country trade data comparison
method (what we prefer to call here trade mirror statistics). They argue
that the assumption of no misinvoicing in partner countries cannot be
supported and raise doubts about the reliability of the method. Hong &
Pak (2016) argue that the advanced economies trade data cannot serve as
a counterfactual to the developing countries’ trade data. Hong & Pak
(2016) convincingly show that advanced economies also likely suffer from
trade misinvoicing, and therefore that the results of the trade mirror
statistics approach are biased. Unfortunately, given the data
limitations, the scale of bias is hard to determine. As a more promising
alternative approach to mirror trade statistics, Hong & Pak (2016)
consider the abnormal prices research that we discuss in the following
subchapter.

Being critical of the methodologies as well as the excessive attention
trade-based illicit financial flows might receive at the cost of other
types of flows for which similar estimates do not exist, Forstater
(2016a) focuses on the trade mirror statistics approach, while Forstater
(2018) discusses on tax and development more generally; and Forstater
(2015) discusses profit shifting by MNEs (and we discuss her views on
this in the later chapter focused on this type of illicit financial
flows). Forstater (2016a), as well as her blogs, focuses on criticising
empirical methodologies of illicit financial flows and their
interpretations. For example, Forstater (2016a) provides some detailed
criticisms of the UNCTAD (2016) report by Ndikumana. She proposes four
areas for further work – understanding domestic realities, measuring
international progress, commodity value chains and the role of
multinational companies. The brief paper by Forstater (2016a) is
accompanied by a comment by one of the GFI economists, Matthew Salomon,
who agrees that focusing only on trade misinvoicing as representative of
all illicit financial flows would be too narrow, but asserts that trade
misinvoicing is an important area of further research and that even when
there are detailed administrative data available, illicit financial
flows remain unobservable and assumptions are needed to estimate them.

In a series of contributions - Nitsch (2012), Nitsch (2016), and Nitsch
(2017) - Nitsch discusses the limitations of the trade-based
methodologies. For example, Nitsch (2016) critiques the GFI methodology,
focusing in particular on deficiencies in the use of mirror trade
statistics to quantify the extent of capital outflows due to trade
misinvoicing. He identifies what he believes to be arbitrary
assumptions, mixed methodologies and skewed sampling to argue that their
estimates have no substantive meaning. Nitsch (2017) observes that a
highly disaggregated transaction-level data is usually not available to
researchers and misinvoicing behaviour is thus often identified from
more aggregate trade information, which introduces two types of
problems. First, at a more aggregate level, discrepancies in mirror
trade statistics from misinvoiced trade transactions may cancel each
other out. Second, for the analysis of aggregate data, the set of
assumptions that is used for the identification of misinvoicing
practices typically becomes even more restrictive and we discuss these
assumptions below. An additional complication is that the accuracy of
trade misinvoicing estimates is unknown, since, as Nitsch (2017) argues,
only an unknown fraction of all misreported trade activities is
identified from official statistics.

Building on his earlier critical assessment in Nitsch (2012), Nitsch
(2016) provides insights into pitfalls of mirror trade statistics and
how the problems might be overcome (albeit he does not seem to be very
optimistic on this topic in Nitsch (2017)). Nitsch (2017) presents
similar critical points to Nitsch (2016) but makes somewhat more
strident conclusions about existing methodologies (“a matter of faith”)
without providing much new guidance for improved methodologies in the
future.

Below we focus on the discussion of assumptions by Nitsch (2016). Nitsch
(2016) observes that the trade mirror statistics approach is in
principle a credible methodology only if a few restrictive assumptions
hold: for example, if it was applied on transaction-level data with
information on the transactions from both countries, and the
misinvoicing affected only one side of the transaction. The latter is a
crucial implicit assumption of the trade mirror statistics approach as
applied by the GFI: the trade statistics of the two countries are
assumed to be affected differently, with one a perfect reflection of
reality (the transaction is recorded and is recorded correctly) while
the other is deliberately misinvoiced. While Fisman & Wei (2009) make
the assumption explicit and argue why it is likely to hold in the case
of antiques and cultural property, it is not clear from the GFI and
other similar research how often trade misinvoicing is carried out in
this way (whether none, one, or both of the countries’ statistics should
be affected). Given these assumptions, not only it is hard to estimate
the scale of illicit financial flows, but also hard to know the accuracy
of these estimates.

Focusing on the deficiencies of the mirror trade statistics approach as
applied by GFI in particular, Nitsch (2016) identifies four crucial
assumptions of the GFI approach and some of these relate to other
applications of mirror trade statistics. First, GFI assumes that the
differences between export and import values are homogeneous across
countries at the rate of 10% of transportation costs. He documents the
sensitivity of this assumption as well as that it is not consistent with
the observed values. Second, all (other than these transportation costs)
discrepancies in countries’ trade statistics are assumed to be a result
of trade misinvoicing and thus illicit financial flows – and no other
reasons are allowed by definition, which is bound to lead to
overestimates.

This assumption has been addressed to a degree. Since 2013, following a
critical analysis by Kessler & Borst (2013), GFI take into account the
transit trade of Hong Kong (but not of other similar countries), which
is important for China in particular, and this should make the estimates
somewhat more realistic. They also made a few similar adjustments for
other countries. But there are a number of countries that serve as
transit countries and their role in trade might cause trade gaps
(“Rotterdam and Antwerp effect”), as argued, for example, by Herrigan,
Kochen, & Williams (2005).

Third, only discrepancies that lead to (positive) outflows out of
developing countries are considered. A number of assumptions could
explain this methodological position - either there are only outflows
out of developing countries or only outflows are worth their focus or
the method works well when outflows are estimates and not so well when
inflows are estimates. At least one form of this assumption seems to be
reflected in that GFI adds a particular flow to the overall sum only if
it is an outflow from developing countries (any estimates that might
indicate an inflow to developing countries are set at zero). And in the
most recent report by GFI, Spanjers & Salomon (2017) newly report also
the estimated inflows in developing countries.

The fourth assumption, identified by Nitsch (2016), is that the GFI
assumes that countries’ aggregate trade with the world is representative
about trade misinvoicing of country’s partners. This aggregation enables
the inflows and outflows to cancel out each other and thus the estimates
based on comparison with the world are lower-bound estimates. This
fourth assumption applies only to a part of GFI estimates since 2013,
when they started using bilateral data for a share of the developing
countries. GFI still partly, in their high estimates, relies on
extrapolation, or scaling up, on a sample of advanced economies partners
for the whole trade of developing countries - if advanced economies are
likely to be the destination of more illicit financial flows than other
countries, this extrapolation biases the estimates upwards.

There is another reason why this extrapolation likely leads to upwards
bias. Any use of trade mirror statistics faces the challenge of
attributing observed discrepancies to one of the partners since import
overinvoicing in one country is equivalent to export underinvoicing in
its trading partner. Without any decision, both of these were counted
and thus double counted in the total. GFI solves this by focusing on
outflows from developing countries. However, by this extrapolation,
estimated trade misinvoicing related to the trade among developing
countries is counted twice. Furthermore, Kellenberg & Levinson (2016)
find evidence of trade misreporting in both developing and developed
countries, with only a few detected differences, and Hong & Pak (2016)
make a similar point. Given the importance of these assumptions and
changes in methodology, it is perhaps not surprising that the estimates
published by the GFI are not very consistent over time. Also, Nitsch
(2017) notes that the country-level estimates for some countries vary by
orders of magnitude over the years.

Among his other, perhaps more minor, comments, Nitsch (2016) notes that
although GFI has been transparent about the use of the data and
methodologies, the fact that they often make changes in their
methodologies makes any subsequent analysis difficult. He also observes
that in GFI’s first report on illicit financial flows out of developing
countries, Kar & Cartwright-Smith (2008) start combining trade and
capital-account data based estimates, but that they do not sufficiently
discuss how the two overlap or complement each other.

Overall, Nitsch (2016) acknowledges that given the nature of illicit
financial flows and data available, there is no first-best solution and
he provides suggestions for a more nuanced approach in three areas. His
first call for more micro evidence – perhaps focused on a small number
of trading relationships important for a given country - is partly
already being answered, as we review the recent research in our third
subchapter. He hopes that this could shed more light on the relative
importance of trade misinvoicing in illicit financial flows. Second, for
a global estimate he suggests to focus on a few large countries
responsible for a majority of illicit financial flows. Third, he sees a
potential in the use of the trade mirror statistics approach, especially
at the product level and when institutional knowledge about practices of
trade misinvoicing is absent.

### Results

It is necessary to consider the results with a high degree of caution in
the light of the critical evaluation of the methodologies above.

In the most recent GFI analysis of illicit financial flows to and from
developing countries between 2005 and 2014, Spanjers & Salomon (2017)
estimate the illicit financial flows (or outflows) from developing
countries in 2014 at between \$620 billion and \$970 billion. In this
report they publish such a range for the first time. Also for the first
time, they put equal emphasis on inflows and estimate them in 2014 at
between \$1.4 and \$2.5 trillion. These and earlier estimates of the GFI
had arguably had an impact on media and public debate, with, for
instance, The Economist (2014) using their results and linking them,
among other examples, with money laundering through trade misinvoicing
by Mexican drug gangs. Nitsch (2016) looks at the estimates of the GFI
reports over time and observes two patterns: the estimated illicit
financial flows increase over time, while estimates at the beginning of
the sample period have been mostly revised downwards. He also points out
the high variance of some of the GFI’s country-level estimates over the
years, with some country estimates differing substantially from year to
year (in some cases due to changes in methodology).

In the most recent report, GFI still combine capital-account and trade
approaches to estimating illicit financial flows (we describe the former
in the next chapter). In their lower bound estimates of outflows, trade
misinvoicing is responsible for two thirds of the total, while what they
call unrecorded balance of payments flows (using net errors and
omissions from the capital account as a proxy for these, which we
discuss in detail in the next chapter) accounts for the remaining third.
They estimate that sub-Saharan Africa suffers most in terms of illicit
outflows. Sub-Saharan African is also the focus of the series of papers
by Ndikumana & Boyce (e.g. 2010). Ndikumana & Boyce tend to publish only
overall estimates of capital flight including trade misinvoicing, and we
thus cannot discuss their estimates here in detail. Instead, we discuss
their overall estimates in the following chapter that focuses on
estimates using capital account data.

In a section devoted to estimates of trade mispricing, United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa & African Union (2015) estimate these
trade-based illicit financial outflows from Africa at \$242 billion for
a period between 2000 and 2008. Making use of their product-level data,
ECA (2015) estimate that around 56% of these outflows come from oil,
precious metals and minerals, ores, iron and steel, and copper. They
highlight the most affected countries (such as Nigeria and Algeria for
oil, Zambia for copper) as well as the trading partners involved.
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (2016) estimates
that outflows from countries in Latin America and the Caribbean through
international trade price manipulation have increased in the last
decade, representing 1.8% of regional GDP (totalling US\$ 765 billion in
the period 2004-2013). In 2013, illicit outflows climbed to US\$ 101.6
billion and the associated tax losses stood at about US\$ 31 billion
(0.5 percentage points of GDP) as a result of foreign trade price
manipulation. This amount represents between 10% and 15% of the actual
corporate income tax take. Mexico and Costa Rica are estimated to be
among the most severely affected.

Taking a similar, but somewhat more general approach, Kellenberg &
Levinson (2016) observe the differences in mirror trade statistics and
find that gaps between importer- and exporter-reported trade at the
country level vary systematically with GDP, tariffs and taxes, auditing
standards, corruption, and trade agreements, suggesting that firms
intentionally misreport trade data. Using the example of Cameroon,
Raballand, Cantens, & Arenas (2012) present the use of mirror trade
statistics as a useful tool to help identify customs fraud. Similarly,
for Madagascar, Chalendard, Raballand, & Rakotoarisoa (2017) use mirror
trade statistics at the individual transaction level to identify
discrepancies and then products and importers in which customs fraud
seems to be likely.

### Conclusions

The influential illicit financial flows estimates by the GFI and
Ndikumana and Boyce are based on country-level trade data, and are
subject to well-argued critical evaluations of their methodology and
results. The GFI estimates in particular have had their share of both
media attention and criticism, which remains largely relevant despite
some methodological revisions over time. These limitations, coupled with
the increasing availability of commodity-level trade data for a number
of developing countries (e.g. through the UN Comtrade database),
indicate a gap in research that could result into more reliable
trade-based estimates. We investigate how existing research has made use
of the advantages (as well the disadvantages) of these possibilities in
the next subchapter, before turning to the state of the art studies
based on transaction-level data in the final subchapter.

1.  Commodity-level trade estimates: abnormal prices
    ------------------------------------------------

    1.  ### Overview

Having discussed misreported trade volumes in the previous subchapter on
the mirror trade statistics approach, we now turn to a discussion of
misreported trade prices. The relevant studies here are based on trade
data that allow identification of ‘abnormal’ prices at the commodity
level. As the previous subchapter documents, some of the early trade
data approaches in the literature on illicit financial flows use
international trade data and the more recent study often used data at
commodity (or product) level to study trade mispricing. Trade mispricing
occurs when transactions between both related and unrelated parties are
mispriced to avoid tariffs, taxes or achieve similar, illicit or other,
objectives (in contrast to a more narrowly defined transfer mispricing
that describes only transactions between related parties within a
multinational corporation). In other words, trade mispricing (among
unrelated trade partners) and transfer mispricing (among related
partners such as affiliates of the same MNE), consist of inflating (or
deflating) prices in order to shift income or profits from one country
to another to take advantage of tax or other differences. For illicit
financial outflows, trade mispricing enables shifting income or profits
out of countries mainly either through import overinvoicing or export
underinvoicing, although there are some plausible motivations for import
underinvoicing or import overinvoicing, as summed up in Table 3 above.

In this subchapter we focus on studies making use of abnormal prices.
These studies usually examine the normality or extremeness of trade
prices, which are most often derived as unit values by dividing trading
amount in currency with the corresponding amount of trade - weight in
kilograms. The prices can be estimated as unit values only with these
more detailed, commodity-level, data, rather than the country-level data
used often in the studies based on trade mirror statistics approach.
Already some of the above discussed research uses commodity level trade
data, but its focus is on trade mirror statistics and thus trade that is
not being recorded by one of the trade partners. In this subchapter we
focus on trade mispricing and thus illicit financial flows that are
being observed in the data.

### Data

Much of the research by Simon Pak, John Zdanowicz and colleagues, such
as de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005), uses data from the United States
Merchandise Trade Data Base of the United States Department of Commerce,
Bureau of Census, which is a reliable source of detailed data, but only
for one country’s trading relationships, the United States. The US trade
data is available on a monthly basis since 1989. Some studies combine
this data source with other data sources – for example, Christian Aid
(2009) also uses monthly Eurostat data for EU countries, which dates
back to 1988. For both data sets used by Christian Aid (2009), even when
some products have no defined measure of units and are thus not included
in the analysis, the total number of observations per year is in
millions (more than 10 million for the US during 2005-2007 period, while
over 80 million observations for the EU in 2007). Some of this work uses
the United Nations UN Comtrade database, discussed – including its
limitations - in the previous subchapter.

### Methodology

A number of studies have used trade data to study abnormal prices in
order to estimate the scale of capital flight or illicit financial
flows, with a duo of authors Pak and Zdanowicz carrying out pioneering
work in this area (De Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz, 2005; de Boyrie, Pak, &
Zdanowicz, 2005; Pak, 2007; Zdanowicz, 2009) with their early study from
1994 (Simon J. Pak & Zdanowicz, 1994) and with perhaps a latest similar
study published in 2018 (Cathey, Hong, & Pak, 2018). A number of these
studies, such as de Boyrie et al. (2005), Zdanowicz, Pak, & Sullivan
(1999), Pak, Zanakis, & Zdanowicz (2003) use detailed transactions data
from the United States Merchandise Trade Data Base of the United States
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. Cathey, Hong, & Pak (2018),
Pak in a report for Christian Aid (2009) and Pak (2012) use Eurostat
data for EU countries in addition for the US data.

All of these and a number of other papers make use of a price filter
approach or some variation of it and we describe it below. The objective
of this method is to construct a price matrix from which normal prices
are derived and compared with the actual prices to identify ‘abnormal’
prices and thus estimate the scale of related capital flows. The prices
are constructed as unit values by dividing the financial amounts by
physical weights. This approach reflects a hypothesised assumption that
unit values for a given product category should vary only within a
relatively narrow interval. It implies that any outliers, abnormal
prices, might suggest misinvoicing and we discuss critical assumptions
below.

In the detailed description of methodology, we focus on one of the
papers, de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005), in which they estimate the
magnitude of abnormal pricing in international trade between the US and
Russia. They use transactions data for over 15 thousand import
harmonized commodity codes and over 8 thousand export harmonized
commodity codes with detail over 18 million import transactions and 13
million export transactions per year for the period between 1995 and
1999. The fact that they focus on one country, Russia, enables the
authors to provide detailed overview of the relevant literature, with
Tikhomirov (1997) identifying Cyprus, the UK, Switzerland, the
Netherlands, Germany and Denmark as the countries, additional to the US
focus by de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005), used to export capital from
Russia.

Their price filter analysis relies on determining some transaction
prices as abnormal. Importantly, they consider Russia-US transaction
prices normal only when they are within the inter-quartile range of
prices of (i) transactions between Russia and the US, or, alternatively,
(ii) transactions between the US and all countries in the world. We
capture this approach in the following equation for an example of
capital flight resulting from over-invoiced exports from Russia to the
US in year *t* for a commodity *k*:

$$\text{KF}_{i,j,t}^{k} = \left( P_{i,j,t}^{k} - \text{lower\ quartile\ of\ P}_{world,j,t}^{k} \right) \times X_{j,i,t}^{k}$$

where *i* is Russia, *j* is the US, *t* is a year, *k* is a selected
commodity. The equation for under-invoiced imports would follow a
similar logic (using upper quartile instead of lower quartile), and
similarly in alternative specifications with the use of
$P_{Russia,j,t}^{k}$ instead of $P_{world,j,t}^{k}$ and median price
instead of quartiles. For each alternative benchmark prices (i.e.
world-US or Russia-US, quartile or median), they arrive at estimates of
total capital flight by summing over-invoiced exports and under-invoiced
imports together and across all commodities. In addition to estimating
the scale of capital flight, they use econometric models by Cuddington
(1987) and Pastor (1990) to test whether the capital flight is due to
money laundering, tax evasion or portfolio consideration.

Pak has adjusted this methodology for a larger set of countries for
Christian Aid (2009). It uses the same data source for the US, and the
detailed Eurostat data of 27 then members of the EU. As in de Boyrie,
Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005), Pak in Christian Aid (2009) assumes that the
price range between an upper quartile price and a lower quartile price
for the most detailed product classification is the arm’s length price
range. In contrast with de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005), the trade
data used are grouped at product level classification which is likely to
result - with some overpriced and some underpriced transactions – into
underestimation of the amount of mispricing. Also, Christian Aid (2009)
notes that the fact that partner data from other countries are not used
in this analysis and that large transactions that are only slightly
mispriced might go undetected and contribute to underestimation. Other
reasons, such as the product homogeneity assumption discussed above or
the volatility of prices during the studied time periods (years used for
the price quartiles), could support overestimation.

Using the example of Madagascar, an African country with one of the
lowest income per capita and lowest shares of taxes per GDP, Chalendard,
Raballand, & Rakotoarisoa (2017) use detailed statistical data from both
Madagascar confidential database and UN Comtrade. Chalendard, Raballand,
& Rakotoarisoa (2017) used the abnormal prices approach to indicate
product misclassification. Specifically, they used inconsistent unit
value as indicative of customs fraud – unit values of rice and
fertilizers (products exempted from value added tax) were much higher
than corresponding world prices.

Naturally, there are limitations to this methodological approach, some
of which are common to trade mirror statistics discussed in the previous
subchapter and some of which are new. For example, when deliberate trade
mispricing does occur, it might be possible to detect it only when the
mispricing is extreme and almost impossible when the mispricing is only
slight. As The Economist (2014) argues, money launderers, who curb their
greed and invoice goods up or down by, say, 10% only, will probably
continue to get away with it. We discuss the limitations, including the
assumptions that determine price abnormality, below, and we focus here
on the critical evaluation of the main Pak and Zdanowicz price filter
approach, for which Nitsch (2012) provides one of the most detailed
critiques.

One important set of assumptions is about the role of prices used in the
estimation. For such estimation of mispricing, one would ideally like to
have a measure of what the price was if it was an arm’s length
transaction. This approach to estimating trade mispricing is similar to
what recent studies at the frontier of research are estimating, but here
the lack of persuasive counterfactual normal prices is substituted with
quartile range thresholds. This most often used interquartile price
range is endogenous and does not seem to be an objective basis for an
arms’ length price range. In addition, when product categories are used
since transaction- or product-level data are not usually available, each
category includes goods with a different degree of heterogeneity. Pak &
Zdanowicz (1994) argue that the use of inter-quartile range is supported
by US regulation on transfer prices in international trade and they use
two versions (US-Russia trade and US-world trade) and median prices as
alternative benchmarks of normal prices. Still, these thresholds are
understandably criticised, e.g. by Johannesen & Pirttilä (2016), as
arbitrary. Pak in Christian Aid (2009) acknowledges it, actually using
the same word (page 52). In addition to the arbitrariness of setting the
interquartile range as the norm, Nitsch (2012) highlights that
implementation of such a definition is sensitive to the number of
observations – with a small number of relevant data points, as is often
the case, potentially leading to biased results. In addition, variations
in prices might be caused by (unobserved) differences in the timing of
carrying out and/or recording trade transactions.

The required assumption of this approach is that there is a way to
determine which prices are abnormal, but in reality the available data
do not provide other options than the inevitably arbitrary statistical
definitions such as interquartile ranges. Generally, there is no
reliable guidance on what price is normal or not. As a potential remedy,
in addition to average or other statistical distributions of unit values
being used as the control prices or proxies for arms’ length prices (in
the inter-quartile method by Pak & Zdanowicz, 1994), also prices
available from the markets can be used, as in the pioneering research by
Hong, Pak, & Pak (2014), in which the authors use the import price of
bananas reported by UNCTAD almost on a monthly basis. However, the
market prices for many goods and product categories are not readily
available, and some data sources might be actually subject to the
similar challenges as the international trade unit values.

Nitsch (2012) points out that the data usually used are for product
categories rather than products and that information is limited in
respect of homogeneity of these product categories, including in
quality, that might lie behind some observed differences in unit values.
He argues that many of the product categories (around half) are
catch-all with the word ‘other’ in their names.

It follows that one important assumption of this approach, which is
partly shared even with the more recent studies in the following
chapter, is that the products within the identified detailed
product-level categories are homogenous. This homogeneity assumption
enables the authors to make abnormality responsible for the deviation
from the prevailing prices of the product category defined by
inter-quartile price range or median price. In the case of de Boyrie,
Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005), they use harmonized commodity codes in the
international price matrix, which are specific product classifications
more detailed and arguably more useful than industry classifications
(such as standard industrial classification codes). These harmonized
commodity codes are arguably the most detailed publicly available trade
classification (the more confidential sources of more detailed data are
discussed in the next subchapter). Still, if this assumption does not
hold, for example in the case of quality differences, the method is to
overestimate the extent of mispricing. An additional complication is
that the identification of abnormal prices through unit values assumes
that trade misinvoicing is occurring exclusively via abnormal prices
rather than weight, in case of which the identification of abnormal
prices is inaccurate and, furthermore, the extent of this inaccuracy is
unknown.

Partly to counter similar critique, de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005)
in the discussion of their results emphasise that their analysis
identifies only potentially abnormally priced trades (for example, to
help investigators preselect cases for auditing) rather than proving
that they are abnormal. They acknowledge that when the number of
transactions is small for a certain commodity, their identification may
not be reliable. Given the discussed assumptions, also other researchers
using this approach argue for its use not for estimation of scale of
trade misinvoicing, but as a tool for detecting suspicious transactions
from detailed trade data, for example, for auditing purposes by tax and
legal authorities (Hong & Pak, 2017). Indeed, this is similar to what
some economists at the research frontier do as we discuss in the
following subchapter on studies using transaction-level data.

### Results

Academic studies have used trade data to study trade mispricing (De
Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz, 2005; de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz, 2005; Pak,
2007; Zdanowicz, 2009), and these types of methods have been also often
applied by non-governmental organisations such Tax Justice Network
(2007), Hogg et al. (2009), or Hogg et al. (2010). They all broadly
support the view that tax indeed motivates trade pricing decisions.
However, the important assumptions needed and the partially aggregated
nature of the data pose methodological limitations that lead us to
interpret these results with caution.

The one study of Pak, Zdanowicz et al that we describe in the
methodology section in detail, de Boyrie, Pak, & Zdanowicz (2005),
attribute flows through trade mispricing to money laundering and tax
evasion. For US-Russia trade data, they estimate the amount of capital
shifted through abnormal prices from Russia in 1995 at 3% and 6% of
total trade for exports and imports, respectively. They estimate annual
capital flight from Russia to the US to range from a low of 0.2 billion
USD in 1997 to a high of 0.6 billion USD in 1999 when compared to
US-Russia transactions, and, alternatively, to range from a low of 1
billion USD in 1998 to a high of 5 billion USD in 1999 when compared to
the US-world trade.

In a combination of mirror trade statistics and mispricing methods,
Chalendard, Raballand, & Rakotoarisoa (2017) estimate for Madagascar
that undervaluation and product misclassification, each roughly
accounting for a half of the total, are responsible for potential
revenue losses of almost 100 million USD, which represented 30 percent
of total non-oil revenues collected by customs in 2014. Clothing and
telephones are most often undervalued, while fertilizers and rice are
often misclassified.

Interestingly, Hong, Pak, & Pak, (2014) apply the abnormal pricing
method with market prices for their main results, but compare it with
estimates based on the interquartile price filter as well as trade
mirror statistics. They show that the imports are undervalued by 54% on
average between 2000 and 2009 using market prices as a benchmark in the
case of US banana imports from Latin American and Caribbean countries;
while using the other two, more common methods they find little evidence
of either under- or over-valuation of US banana imports – suggesting,
perhaps, that the methodological limitations of the common methods may
tend to bias results *against* uncovering illicit activity in
commodity-level data.

### Conclusions

The existing evidence based on commodity level data is useful in
highlighting the specific commodities and countries most vulnerable to
trade mispricing, but the results are of limited reliability for
estimating the scale and are superseded in their credibility by
estimates based on transaction-level data.

One area of promising future research could be to use compare the
results achieved with the relatively detailed commodity-level data
reviewed in this subchapter with the results using the methods at the
frontier of research discussed in the following subchapter. It might be
possible to calibrate estimates using UN Comtrade ,on the basis of more
reliable transaction-level data for countries for which both are
available. This would provide evidence of not only the scale of
potential bias of UN Comtrade-based commodity-level studies, but also
indicate whether and to what extent UN Comtrade can be relied upon when
there are no transaction-level trade data available.

1.  Transaction-level trade estimates: research frontier
    ----------------------------------------------------

    1.  ### Overview

There is an increasing number of research papers that use detailed trade
data at the level of transactions and, with this, methodologies that
deliver more credible results. Their most obvious disadvantage in
contrast with the studies discussed in the previous two subchapters is
that they are limited in geographical coverage, usually focusing on one
country only (namely, the source of the unique data). Most of the
existing evidence is for major, high income economies such as the United
States, France or the United Kingdom, but there are also recent
preliminary results for South Africa by Wier (2017) – a first study
using such detailed data and providing evidence for transfer mispricing
for a developing country, and future research is likely to provide
evidence for smaller and lower income countries. The current
difficulties in obtaining consistent, high-quality data of this type
mean that the leading global estimates at present rely instead on
national-level data – and serious criticisms, including of the GFI
approach discussed above, have been raised and we discussed them above.
While most of the studies below do not explicitly mention illicit
financial flows, they are natural follow-ups to the previous two
subchapters in estimating the scale of transfer and trade mispricing.

Below we discuss the earlier evidence for the US by Clausing (2003) and
Bernard, Jensen, & Schott (2006), two influential empirical research
papers on transfer mispricing for the US from the 2000s. Clausing (2003)
provides one of the first empirical pieces of evidence consistent with
theoretical predictions regarding tax-motivated income shifting
behaviour. Bernard, Jensen, & Schott (2006), in their well-cited working
paper, developed a new method for identifying transfer mispricing and
applied it to detailed data of US-based MNEs. There is also more recent
evidence for the United States by Flaaen (2017), who uses
transaction-level data to find profit-shifting behaviour by US MNEs via
the strategic transfer pricing of intra-firm trade.

We also discuss the perhaps most persuasive recent evidence by Davies,
Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017) as well as by Vicard (2015), both of
which rely on detailed data for France. Vicard (2015), in a Banque de
France working paper, provides evidence of transfer pricing and its
increasing role for France over time. Using similar French data to
Vicard (2015) but for one, earlier year only (1999), Davies, Martin,
Parenti, & Toubal (2017) arrive at a somewhat lower estimate, most of
which is driven by the exports of 450 firms to ten tax havens. We also
discuss recent research for Denmark, in which Cristea and Nguyen (2016)
use firm-level panel data on Danish exports to find evidence of profit
shifting by MNEs through transfer pricing. We note that there is also
recent evidence for the United Kingdom, although similarly to Wier
(2017) for South Africa, we do not discuss below these very recent
research contributions. Liu, Schmidt-Eisenlohr, & Guo (2017) use
detailed data on export transactions and corporate tax returns of UK
MNEs, and conclude that firms manipulate their transfer prices to shift
profits to lower-taxed destinations.

### Data

This research area, which has been intensively developing in the last
few years, uses data that are typically at the transaction level, and
are confidential but sometimes made available through a collaboration
with the country-specific source responsible for collection of the data
and for its use for research purposes.

In one of the earliest contributions to this literature, rather than
transaction-level data, Clausing (2003) uses monthly data on import and
export product prices collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics from
1997 to 1999 that differentiate between intrafirm and arm’s-length
transactions (in total, 425000 observations of monthly prices 33% of
these for exports and 38% for intrafirm trade). Bernard, Jensen, &
Schott (2006) use the Linked/Longitudinal Firm Trade Transaction
Database which links individual trade transactions to specific firms in
the United States. It contains detailed foreign trade data, including
whether the transaction takes place at arm’s length or between related
parties, assembled by the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S. Customs Bureau
which captures all U.S. international trade transactions between 1993
and 2000.

There are two recent papers using transaction-level data. Vicard (2015)
uses detailed firm level export and import data by origin, destination
and product to estimate revenue impact of profit shifting through
transfer pricing. He exploits the panel dimension of data and provides
estimates for years 2000-2014. Also using French firm-level data,
Davies, Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017) makes use of 1999 information
on the prices of products and whether they are arm’s length or intrafirm
transactions. They also employ the data to estimate the counterfactual
arm’s length prices of an intra-firm transaction. Furthermore, they
argue that France’s relatively simple exemption system of international
corporate income taxation provides a better case study for tax-motivated
transfer mispricing than the more complicated US system that aimed then
to tax worldwide income of MNEs resident there. Similarly to Davies,
Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017) for France, Cristea and Nguyen (2016)
argue that Denmark is an interesting case study because of its
territorial taxation system, in which only income earned from activities
performed by Danish residents gets taxed. Cristea and Nguyen (2016) use
a firm-level dataset of exports from Denmark between 1999 and 2006.

### Methodology

To indicate whether there is evidence of tax-motivated transfer pricing
in US intrafirm trade prices, Clausing (2003) applies a regression
analysis to observe the relationship between export or import prices
with tax rate, and includes a dummy variable to indicate when trade is
intrafirm. Other similarly indirect evidence to Clausing (2003) that we
do not discuss below includes Swenson (2001), who used firm-product
level data to show that variations in the reported customs values of US
imports from five major economies during the 1980s are consistent with
the transfer pricing incentives created by taxes and tariffs. Also for
the US, Neiman (2010) uses transaction-level data to show that
intra-firm prices are less sticky and have a greater exchange rate pass
through than arm’s length prices. For the value added manufacturing data
from across the OECD countries, Bartelsman & Beetsma (2003) disentangle
the income shifting effects from the effects of tax rates on real
activity and find evidence consistent with transfer pricing. Similarly,
Overesch (2006) uses German MNEs’ data to show that intra-firm sales are
related to corporate tax rates.

The research discussed below with truly transaction-level data estimates
the extent of transfer mispricing as the difference between the so
called comparable uncontrolled prices and the actual MNEs’ prices
multiplied by the quantity traded:

$$IFF\ by\ transfer\ mispricing = \left( Comparable\ uncontrolled\ prices - Actual\ MNEs'\ prices\  \right) \times Quantity\ traded$$

Most of the research below uses this equation implicitly or explicitly
in one form or another, but varies substantially with regard to details
and especially how they estimate the prices and what control groups or
variations in tax rates and other variables they make use of in their
empirical strategies.

Bernard, Jensen, & Schott (2006) use a theoretical model to show that
the difference between arm’s-length and related-party prices depends on
firm, product and country characteristics. In their empirical part, they
estimate arm’s-length-related-party price wedge as the difference
between the log comparable uncontrolled price (a proxy for arm’s-length
price that they estimate on the basis of detailed data at the country,
firm, month and transport mode level) and the log related-party price
(which they directly observe). They regress firms’ the price wedges on
destination-country tax rates and destination-country product-level
import tariff rates as well as proxies of product differentiation and
firm market power.

In his empirical strategy, Vicard (2015) uses the price wedge between
arm's length and related party trade on a market (defined by destination
country and product) and its correlation with the corporate income tax
rate of each partner country compared to France as a systematic evidence
of transfer mispricing.

In their theoretical framework, Davies, Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017)
show that due to the concealment costs of transfer mispricing, only some
MNEs might choose to do it, with the probability increasing with the tax
differential between home and host countries and the amount of exports.
In their framework, Davies, Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017) also
recognise that intra-firm prices could systematically deviate from arm’s
length prices not only because of tax avoidance stressed by most of the
other literature, but also because of pricing to market behaviour (which
implies that exporters adjust their prices to the prices that prevail in
the export markets). In their empirical approach, they control for
pricing-to-market determinants (transport costs, tariffs, GDP per
capita) to capture only the tax avoidance effects. In contrast with
existing literature, the methodology and data of Davies, Martin,
Parenti, & Toubal (2017) provide evidence of the impact of tax rates and
tax havens on transfer prices themselves rather than evidence suggestive
of transfer pricing more generally. Furthermore, they use the somewhat
ad hoc and outdated classification of tax havens proposed by Hines &
Rice (1994), which results into ten tax havens present in their data
sample: the Bahamas, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Cyprus, Hong Kong,
Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta, Singapore, and Switzerland.

For the Danish export data, Cristea and Nguyen (2016) use triple
difference estimations to exploit the response of export unit values to
acquisitions of foreign affiliates and to changes in corporate tax
rates. They estimate the extent to which MNEs manipulate both transfer
prices to affiliates and arm’s length prices to unrelated firms in order
to reduce their global tax payments. They further argue that by ignoring
the MNEs’ manipulation of arm’s length prices and using these as
comparable uncontrolled prices, tax authorities and researches
underestimate the extent to which the MNEs manipulate prices in order to
shift profits.

### Results

For the US trade data Clausing (2003) finds a strong relationship
between countries’ tax rates and the prices of intrafirm transactions.
Controlling for other variables that affect trade prices, as country tax
rates are lower, US intrafirm export prices are lower, and US intrafirm
import prices are higher. Her results indicate that a 1 percent drop in
taxes abroad reduces US export prices between related parties by 0.9 to
1.8 percent. This finding is consistent with theoretical predictions
regarding tax-motivated income shifting behaviour. Bernard, Jensen, &
Schott (2006) find that the prices exporters set for their arm's-length
customers are substantially larger than the prices recorded for
related-parties. The difference is smaller for commodities than for
differentiated goods, is increasing in firm size and firm export share,
and is greater for goods sent to countries with lower corporate tax
rates and higher tariffs.

For French trading companies Vicard (2015) shows that the price wedge
between arm's length and related party transactions varies
systematically with the corporate tax rate differential between France
and its trading partner. He estimates that this profit shifting
decreased France’s corporate tax base by 8 billion USD in 2008, and that
the related missing tax revenues amount to 10% of the corporate tax paid
by multinational groups located in France that trade with a related
party. He also finds that the scale is increasing over time. He
estimates the semi-elasticity of corporate profits to tax differentials
at 0.5: that is, a 10 percentage point increase in tax differential
would increase the pre-tax income reported by the affiliate by 5%. This
is based on transfer pricing in goods trade only, and is thus relatively
high in relation to other estimates on balance sheet data, which he
challenges.

Estimates of Davies, Martin, Parenti, & Toubal (2017) suggest that
export prices decrease with corporate tax rate only for intra-firm
transactions, and only for countries with very low tax rates and
especially tax havens (which they consider to combine low tax rates with
other characteristics including banking secrecy). Davies, Martin,
Parenti, & Toubal (2017) arrive at a somewhat lower estimate than Vicard
(2015), most of which is driven by the exports of 450 firms to ten tax
havens. Indeed, they find no evidence of tax avoidance once they
disregard tax haven destinations. Still, they consider their estimates
of tax avoidance through transfer pricing - at 1% of total corporate tax
revenues in France - as economically sizable.

Looking at the sensitivity of exports to tax rates, Cristea and Nguyen
(2016) estimate that Danish MNEs reduce their export prices by 6% in
response to a 10 percentage point decrease in the tax rate of a country
with lower rates than Denmark, which corresponds to a tax revenue loss
of around 3% of Danish MNEs tax returns. The responses in export prices
are higher for differentiated goods (7%) and for MNEs who establish new
affiliates during the sample period (9%).

### Conclusions

The expanding number of research papers providing evidence consistent
with trade or transfer mispricing in an increasing number of countries
suggest that this is a universal phenomenon. One implication might be
that it warrants global solutions. One such solution, for multinationals
at least, would be the abandonment of the arm’s length principle in
favour of a unitary taxation (e.g. global implementation of CCCTB, as
proposed by the European Commission). Before any reform happens, it
should be beneficial to see similar empirical tests of arm’s-length
principles in other countries, if only to provide a preliminary basis
for potential detailed audits by tax authorities or a guidance on the
type of regulation that is needed to limit tax avoidance or to increase
awareness and pressures for a reform.

These studies derive their credibility from and build on detailed,
country-specific data and, therefore, cross-country estimates are
usually not available. The shift in data availability that would allow
comparable cross-country analysis with substantial worldwide coverage,
would be dramatic – however desirable – and feels distant at best. For
the time being, the low number of countries with similar analysis and
the diversity of data available and thus methodologies applied, do not
enable a credible comparison of results across countries or the
estimation of the global scale of the mispricing.

We consider most of the recent transaction-level studies credible for
estimation of the scale of trade-based illicit flows. In contrast, the
estimates based on the trade mirror statistics approach and
country-level data might have been helpful in the past for raising
awareness about these issues, but we do not consider them credible
enough to inform us about the scale of illicit financial flows. We
consider some of the abnormal pricing estimates useful as indicators for
audit and other purposes, but we would not rely on them for the
estimates on overall scale.

Before transactions-level data are available in most countries, to reach
near-global coverage it might be worth trying to adapt these
methodologies for trade data sets (e.g. UN Comtrade) with less detailed
data but better country coverage. Indeed, something similar is what
Kellenberg & Levinson (2016) did with trade mirror statistics method and
UN Comtrade data. But so far, given the data limitations, a better
country coverage can be attained to some extent only at the expense of
credible methodology.

[^1]: <http://www.gfintegrity.org/issue/trade-misinvoicing/> (accessed 1
    June 2018).
